Procedure for Fluctuation Plating Experiments

Materials:
12 LB plates
10 Rifampicin plates (50 micrograms/milliliter) (light-sensitive, should be stored wrapped in foil)
11 5 mL tubes (I like the polystyrene Falcon ones with snap tops)
21 1.5 or 2 mL tubes
E. coli strain to test + antibiotics and inducers (make sure you accurately know their growth rate in the chosen medium + inducers + antibiotics)
Growth Medium for test
LB
PBS buffer
Glassware, Pipettes, etc.

Preparations for a Fluctuation Plating Experiment begin 1 day before the plating. For a growth medium with a doubling time of 30 minutes, you should plan to start the replicate cultures late at night and to plate your cells the next morning (10 hours later). This is done to avoid cells entering stationary phase during the experiment.

Either the 2 nights before plating or the morning the day before plating, start cultures of the E. coli strain in LB with the appropriate antibiotics and inducers. Label 10 5 mL tubes 1-10. Label 1 5 mL tube with "C". Any time before you reach the plating step, fill each of the 21 1.5 or 2 mL tubes with 1 mL of PBS buffer. Label 2 sets of 10 of them with 1 through 10. Label 1 of them B (for blank). Label 10 of the LB plates 1 through 10.

Approximately 10 doublings before you intend to start your experiment, transfer your E. coli into your chosen Growth Medium with the appropriate antibiotics and inducers. You should dilute them to an OD of ~.1*10^-3.

After the 10 doublings have passed so their OD is ~.1, dilute your E. coli by 10^6 (to reach a target OD of ~10^-7) into 4 mL of fresh Growth Medium + inducers but no antibiotics (some antibiotics drastically affect plating efficiencies even for resistant E. coli). Label 2 LB plates with the strain name, inducers, and starting OD. On each of these plates, plate 100 microliters of the Growth Medium + inducers + E. coli mixture. Aliquot 250 microliters of the mixture per tube into the 5 mL tubes labeled 1-10. Aliquot 500 microliters of this mixture into the 5 mL tube labeled "C". Transfer all 5 mL tubes to a water bath or air shaker at the appropriate temperature (usually 37 C). Transfer the 2 LB plates with cells into the same temperature incubator; invert them.

20 doublings later (when the E. coli have reached OD~.1-1) you will begin the plating procedure. Even for the fastest growing E. coli this will take ~7 hours. If you aren't sure exactly how long this will take, use the 5 mL tube labeled "C" to keep track of the OD when you're getting close (within a couple doublings)

First check that the OD of the tube labeled "C" is between .1 and 1. If it's less than this, wait a little longer. If it's more than this, start over. If it's between these two numbers you can begin plating.

Take all the 5 mL tubes out of the shaker. Take 1 set of the 1.5 or 2 mL tubes with 1 mL of PBS labeled 1-10. Take 1 microliter from each tube and put it into the correspondingly labeled small tube. Vortex the small tubes to mix.

Turn off the lights in the room and close the blinds. Unwrap your rifampicin plates. Label them 1-10. Plate all of each 5 mL tube on the correspondingly numbered rifampicin plate. Place the plates in the incubator with the agar on the bottom for now. You can turn the lights back on now.

Take the set of small tubes that have PBS mixed with E. coli. Get the other set of PBS-filled tubes you haven't used yet. Take 1 microliter from each tube of PBS + E. coli and put it into the matching number PBS-filled tube. Vortex.

Plate 100 microliters of each doubly diluted E. coli + PBS on the correspondingly labeled LB plate. Flip over the rifampicin plates in the incubator (so the agar side will now be on top). Place the LB plates in the incubator agar side on top as well.

After 24 hours, remove all the plates from the incubator. Count the colonies on each LB and rifampicin plate.